<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" version="-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN">

<head>
    <title>Chapter 2</title>
    <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-type" />
    <meta content="utf-8" name="ncc:charset" />
    <link href="../css/base.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css" />
    <link href="../css/sonic-interactions.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css" />
  </head>

<body>
    <h1 class="title" id="ops1">Chapter 2</h1>
    <p class="front">Front p1</p>
    <p class="front">Front p2</p>
    <p>
        Beatrice Christensen Sköld<br />
        Valentin Haüy – the Father of the Education for the Blind<br />
        The Swedish Library of Talking Books and Braille (TPB)
    </p>
    <p>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0005">
            In this study the life and works of Valentin Haüy are described.
        </span>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0006">
            Valentin Haüy (1745-1821), of many called the father of the education of the blind,
        </span>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0007">
            founded a school for blind children of both sexes in Paris in 1785.
        </span>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0008">
            In 1786 he published the first known book about education for the blind.
        </span>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0009">
            His main idea was the necessity of educating the blind to an independent life.
        </span>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0010">
            Thus the blind were trained for different professions such as printing, basket making, sewing etc.
        </span>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0011">
            Another of Haüys ideas was that blind children should not be segregated but educated together with sighted
            children.
        </span>
        <span class="sentence" id="rgn_cnt_0012">
            His method of printing books with letters in relief and ink-print was a minor revolution that enabled the
            blind to read books.
        </span>
    </p>

    <h2 id="rgn_cnt_0095">
        Preface
    </h2>
    <p id="rgn_cnt_0096">
        During my 19 years at the Swedish Library of Talking Books and Braille (TPB), I have frequently been asked about
        the history of the Braille system and these questions were really what motivated my research into the life of
        Louis Braille, the inventor of the system of writing for the blind which was named after him. My investigations
        revealed that Louis Braille himself would have had almost no schooling at all if it had not been for Valentin
        Haüy, the father of education for the blind.
    </p>
</body>

</html>